BetterSDR - Getting Started
===========================

A radio receiver for the RTL-SDR dongle, for people who have never used
one. There are four steps and they take about ten minutes, most of which
is Windows and Python doing the work.

Read this file top to bottom. Step 3 is the one everybody skips, and
skipping it is why the dongle does not work.


WHAT YOU NEED
-------------

  * An RTL-SDR dongle and an antenna. BetterSDR is built and tested
    against the RTL-SDR Blog V4; the V3 and the V4L should work too.

  * Windows 11 (Windows 10 will probably do).

  * Python 3.12 or newer, from https://www.python.org/downloads/
    In the installer, tick "Add python.exe to PATH". If you already have
    Python, you are done - you do not need a second copy.


STEP 1 - PLUG THE DONGLE IN
---------------------------

Use a USB port on the computer itself rather than a hub or an extension
lead, at least until it is working.

Screw the antenna onto it and put the antenna near a window if you can.
Indoors, three feet from an outside wall, is enough to hear FM stations,
weather radio and aircraft.

Windows may announce that it is installing a driver. Let it finish. What
it installs is the wrong driver - it thinks the dongle is a television
tuner - and step 3 replaces it. That is expected and is not a mistake on
your part.


STEP 2 - GET A COPY OF BETTERSDR
--------------------------------

In a terminal, wherever you keep projects:

    git clone https://github.com/pete9857/BetterSDR
    cd BetterSDR

If you do not have git, use the green "Code" button on the GitHub page,
choose "Download ZIP", and extract it somewhere. That works fine, but a
downloaded ZIP is marked by Windows as having come from the internet and
one extra command is needed - see "Windows says an application control
policy blocked a file" near the bottom of this file.


STEP 3 - GIVE THE DONGLE THE RIGHT DRIVER
-----------------------------------------

Windows has no driver for using this dongle as a radio, only for using
it as a TV tuner. Replacing it is a one-off job, done with a small free
tool called Zadig. This is the step that makes everything else work.

  1. Download Zadig from  https://zadig.akeo.ie
     It is a single file and needs no installing.

  2. Right-click the file you downloaded and choose
     "Run as administrator".

  3. In Zadig's menu bar, click Options and tick "List All Devices".
     Nothing useful appears in the dropdown until you do this.

  4. Open the dropdown at the top and choose:

         Bulk-In, Interface (Interface 0)

     *** Interface 0. NOT Interface 1. ***

     The dongle presents itself to Windows as two devices and only the
     first one is the radio. Choosing Interface 1 is the single most
     common mistake, and it produces a dongle that looks installed and
     does not work.

  5. Look at the box to the right of the green arrow. It should say
     WinUSB. If it says something else, click the small up/down arrows
     beside it until it does.

  6. Click "Replace Driver" and wait. It takes a few seconds and may
     look frozen while it works.

  7. When it reports success, close Zadig.

You never have to do this again for this dongle on this computer. If you
later plug it into a different USB port, or into a different computer,
Windows may ask again - repeat these steps if so.

Interface 1 will still show up in Device Manager with no driver at all.
That is correct. Do not try to fix it.

The dongle will no longer work as a TV tuner. If you ever want that
back, Device Manager can uninstall the WinUSB driver.


STEP 4 - START BETTERSDR
------------------------

Double-click  BetterSDR.cmd  in the folder from step 2.

The first time, it builds a private Python environment in a folder
called .venv, downloads what the radio needs, checks your dongle, and
opens the app. That takes a minute or two and needs an internet
connection.

Every time after that, the same double-click just opens the app, in
about a second. BetterSDR.cmd is the only thing you need to remember.

If you prefer a terminal, from inside the folder:

    BetterSDR            in Command Prompt
    .\BetterSDR          in PowerShell

To put it on your desktop, right-click BetterSDR.cmd and choose
"Send to" then "Desktop (create shortcut)". If you want the proper icon
on that shortcut, right-click it, choose Properties, then Change Icon,
and point it at  bettersdr\ui\assets\bettersdr.ico  in this folder.


WHAT TO DO FIRST
----------------

BetterSDR opens on the Discover screen rather than on a spectrum. Pick a
band - FM Radio is the loudest and the easiest - and press Scan. After a
few seconds you get a list of what is actually on the air near you, in
plain English, with the reason it thinks so. Click one to listen.

Everything else is explained in the app itself. Any control whose name
is underlined can be clicked to read what it does, and the Learn tab has
the same articles laid out as a short course.


IF SOMETHING GOES WRONG
-----------------------

First, check the dongle on its own. In a terminal, in this folder:

    BetterSDR.cmd --check

It stops after the check and prints exactly what is wrong and what to do
about it. It is the same check the app runs when it opens.

"No RTL-SDR dongle found"
    It is not plugged in, or the port is not working. Try another port
    directly on the computer.

"Dongle found, but it is set up as a TV tuner"
    Step 3 has not been done, or it was done on the wrong interface. Run
    Zadig again and choose Interface 0.

"Dongle found, but Windows has no driver for it"
    Same answer: step 3, Interface 0.

The dongle looks installed but nothing works
    You almost certainly picked Interface 1 in Zadig. Run Zadig again
    and pick "Bulk-In, Interface (Interface 0)".

"Python was not found on this computer"
    Install Python from https://www.python.org/downloads/ and tick
    "Add python.exe to PATH" in the installer. Then try again.

Windows says an application control policy blocked a file
    Also seen as "WinError 4551". Smart App Control is refusing to load
    the radio driver because the files are marked as having come from
    the internet, which is what happens when you download a ZIP.

    Open PowerShell in this folder and run:

        Get-ChildItem -Recurse | Unblock-File

    then try again. If you cloned with git rather than downloading a
    ZIP, the files carry no such mark and the cause is Smart App Control
    itself; turn it off in Windows Security, under "App & browser
    control", "Smart App Control settings".

    Running the terminal as administrator does NOT help. This is
    enforced by Windows below the point at which being an administrator
    means anything.

The download or the install failed
    Usually no internet connection, or a firewall or proxy in the way.
    Fix that and run BetterSDR.cmd again - it picks up where it left
    off, and running it again after a failure is always safe.


OTHER COMMANDS
--------------

    BetterSDR.cmd              start BetterSDR, installing it first if
                               this is the first time
    BetterSDR.cmd --check      check the driver and the dongle, then stop
    BetterSDR.cmd --update     download and reinstall the dependencies
    BetterSDR.cmd --recreate   throw the .venv folder away and build it
                               again from scratch
    BetterSDR.cmd --dev        also install the test and lint tools

Nothing in .venv is yours. Deleting that folder and running
BetterSDR.cmd again is a safe reset for almost any installation problem.


WHERE YOUR THINGS ARE KEPT
--------------------------

    Settings and bookmarks     %APPDATA%\BetterSDR
    Recordings                 your home folder, "BetterSDR Recordings"

Uninstalling is deleting the folder you cloned. If you want no trace
left, delete %APPDATA%\BetterSDR as well, and use Device Manager to put
the dongle's original driver back.


BetterSDR is free software under the GNU General Public License v3 or
later. See LICENSE and THIRD-PARTY.md. It is for educational use.
